How to Log In and Access DCA Data
with Globus
To access DCA Data you can use Globus to download or transfer (copy) the data to other
systems. The DCA Data is hosted at UCSD on storage managed by the San Diego
Supercomputer Center. Globus services provide secure and reliable access to the data.
Creating a Globus Account
Accessing Data
Download or Transfer Files
Questions
Globus Set Up & Globus Connect Personal
Data Repository
About Globus
About DCA Data
Creating a Globus Account
Follow these steps to create a Globus account.
When selecting the organization, use these guidelines.
● For UC San Diego Researchers & Students:
Organization: University of California, San Diego
Will be redirected to UC San Diego’s SSO login page
● For Non-UC San Diego Researchers
Organization: Select your organization
If you can’t find your organization in the list, you can use a generic identity provider. We
recommend GitHub because of its multifactor authentication (MFA) requirement. You may also
use Google or ORCID, although we encourage you to enable MFA on your account.
Once you’ve created an account, please follow up via email to confirm the account. An invitation
from Globus will be sent to you to join a membership group. Please check your email spam
folder or follow up directly if the invitation has not been received.
When receiving the invitation, please follow the directions on how to accept.
Accessing Data
The DCA Data can only be accessed after accepting membership group invitation.
A summary of the tables and file organization is available as a PDF
(tablesummary.PDF) in the guides folder.
When logged in, click the link here to take you directly to the File Manager page:
● “Collection” Field: Should read “HDSI Industry Data Repository”
● “Path” Field: Should read “/projects/dca/”
● Globus will show files of the following:
○ Guides: Includes DCA data dictionary, table summary, and standard
operating procedures
○ DCA Schemas:
■ university_analysis_pad
■ university_prod
■ public
Download or Transfer Files
It’s recommended to use the transfer capability to reliably copy files and folders. When browsing
the data, you may also download one or more files using the “Get Link” button in the Globus File
Manager.
To transfer dataset to device for compute/analysis:
1. Set up Global Connect Personal
2. Request a Transfer
a. Transfer between your new collection and “HDSI Industry Data Repository”
b. Select datasets
c. Click the “Start” button to transfer the selected files to your collection. Globus will
display a green notification panel confirming submission of transfer
3. Navigate to the Activity page and confirm transfer completion
Questions
Globus Set Up & Globus Connect Personal
● Self-Help Resources & FAQs
● Contact Support Group: support@globus.org
Data Repository
● Contact: Sophia Tran | sotran@ucsd.edu
Rick Wagner | rick@sdsc.edu
About Globus
A research cyberinfrastructure developed and operated as not-for-profit service by University of
Chicago. With Globus, researchers can easily and securely access and manage data from
anywhere, using existing identities via web browser. Learn more here.
About DCA Data
Intel’s System Usage Report (SUR) collects performance data on PCs and other computation
platforms followed by analysis of results in specific engagements. The data covers millions of
real computers worldwide revealing system configuration and system state information about
these computers. Review the DCA data dictionary for more information.